Among the strongest and most consistent patterns of mental health problems are the differences
between men and women. 1
 Neither gender experiences worse mental health overall, but men and
women experience substantially different types of problems (Avison & McAlpine, 1992 ; Gore,
Aseltine, & Colten, 1993 ; Kessler, 2003 ; Turner & Lloyd, 1995 ; Rosen fi eld, Lennon, & White, 2005 ) .
Starting in early adolescence, women suffer more than men from internalizing disorders, which turn
problematic feelings against the self in depression and anxiety. This difference means that women
endure attributions of self-blame and self-reproach more often than men. Women struggle with a
greater sense of loss, hopelessness, and feelings of helplessness to improve their conditions. They also
live with more fears in the forms of phobias, panic attacks, and free- fl oating anxiety states. In contrast,
men predominate in externalizing disorders that are problematic for others, including antisocial personality disorders and substance abuse or dependence. Men are more likely to have enduring personality traits that are aggressive and antisocial in character, with related problems in forming close,
enduring relationships. 2
 Men also are more often dependent on substances, suffer from physical problems, and experience trouble with work and family from drug or alcohol use.
 The National Comorbidity Survey Replication provides the rates of these problems (Kessler, 2003 ) .
This large, nationally representative survey assesses the prevalence of mental health in the general
population and is unbiased by gender differences in treatment or help-seeking. In internalizing problems, 46 million women (29%) suffer from depression over their lifetimes, compared to 28 million
men (18%). In addition, 54 million women (34%) as opposed to 36 million men (23%) endure some
form of anxiety during their lives (Kessler, 2003 ) . In externalizing problems, 8 million men (5%)
 Chapter 14
 Gender and Mental Health
 Sarah Rosen fi eld and Dawne Mouzon
 S. Rosen fi eld (*)
 Department of Sociology, Institute for Health, Health Care Policy, and Aging Research ,
 Rutgers University , Davison Hall, Douglass Campus , New Brunswick , NJ , 08901, USA
e-mail: slrosen@rci.rutgers.edu
 D. Mouzon
 Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy, Institute for Health, Health Care Policy,
and Aging Research , Rutgers University , Davison Hall, Douglass Campus , New Brunswick , NJ , USA
 1 We primarily use the term “mental health problems” because it is more neutral than “mental illness,” which involves
complex questions and debates about disease.
 2 Some researchers think that females are as aggressive as males but express it differently: while males exceed females
in direct aggression that confronts others and in fl icts physical harm, females are higher than males in indirect or covert
aggression that harms others’ relationships, esteem, or reputation. However, a current meta-analysis shows that direct
aggression is the only form in which signi fi cant gender differences occur (Card, Stucky, Sawalani, & Little, 2008 ) . 
278 S. Rosenfi eld and D. Mouzon
experience antisocial personality disorder versus 1.5 million women (1%). 3
 Also, 54 million men
(35%) versus 29 million women (18%) abuse substances sometime in their lives.
 Eliminating these gender disparities would have an enormous impact. If we could reduce the excess
of internalizing problems among women to the rates among men, 20 million fewer women would
endure depression and anxiety in their lifetimes. Reducing the excess of externalizing problems among
men to the rates among women would spare 21 million men from substance abuse or antisocial personality disorder. 4
 These gender differences exist in numerous countries, which suggests that decreasing
the disparities would improve mental health world-wide (World Health Organization, 2006 ) .
 Given the potential bene fi ts, it is critical to understand the origins of gender differences in mental
health, especially social sources that potentially can be modi fi ed. Sociological perspectives trace these
disparities to our conceptions of gender and gender practices. 5
 Research suggests that de fi nitions of
masculinity and femininity have psychological consequences for men and women by producing gender
differences in major risk factors, which, according to stress process and other theories, include differences in the stressors men and women experience, their coping strategies, social relationships, and
personal resources and vulnerabilities (Pearlin, 2010 ; Thoits, 2009, 2010 ; Turner, 2010 ) . This chapter
concentrates on the gender differences in these areas.
 We pay attention to how social groups differ in gender conceptions and practices, as clues to the
roots of these disparities. Because gender differences vary by race and, to some extent, social class,
we fi rst examine gender disparities in mental health across race and class groups. 6
 We then discuss
how these groups de fi ne gender. Finally, we examine the explanations for gender differences in mental
health that are rooted in gender conceptions and practices. 